David the many world's interpretation of
quantum theory arguably is one of the
most
remarkable and astonishing claims
anywhere in science you've been one of
the pioneers of this so please tell me
what it is and how can you believe such
an extravagant claim well what it is
first it is the idea that
um the physical world that we see around
us the the room the Stars galaxies and
so on is just one tiny sliver of the
whole of reality and the whole of
reality includes many such objects many
of the kinds of objects that we have
traditionally thought of as the universe
and so it's sometimes called the many
universes Theory I actually prefer a
different I prefer to call it the
Multiverse Theory because it contains a
lot more than just those things that we
used to call universes it contains other
structure as well so the whole thing as
a whole reality as a whole is the
Multiverse now how can you believe such
a thing
the reason we have to believe this if we
believe anything due to science
is well really there are two strand
there are two um paths uh that Force us
to uh believe that there are that there
is a Multiverse one of them is simply to
ask of quantum theory which is the
deepest theory that we have as
physicists in terms of which other
theories in in physics are expressed
um we ask what does this Theory say
about reality
and it turns out that in the equations
of quantum mechanics to express
um the the what happens in a process in
the laboratory you have to write out
many paths for the apparatus many
different histories of it and if if this
is applied to different histories of the
laboratory the whole of the of the
experimenters of the the world and so on
then that is the parallel universe's
interpretation that's historically that
is why people first believed in parallel
universes
I actually prefer a more concrete
argument which is that if you start with
the experiments if you start with a
simple thing like the two-slit
experiment where you pass a single
Photon through two different slits
that's already giving you a hint of the
parallel universes kind of idea that if
you take seriously what happens in that
experiment the outcome can only be
explained cannot be explained by the
idea that the photon passed through only
one of the states or took any One path
any One path would give a wrong answer
and the different paths affect each
other
again if different paths affect each
other that means that different
histories affect each other and so you
can build the argument up into many
universes so first of all I want to get
a clarification you use the term
Multiverse most scientists today
particularly cosmologists astronomers
use the term Multiverse in terms of
generating multiple universes of the
kind we know today through processes
that involve a part of of cosmology like
inflation theory that shows so how the
Big Bang occurred and how the universe
expanded and branching off of other
universe and there are different other
kinds the Multiverse you're talking
about is radically different yes the
cosmological Multiverse theory is about
universes that do not interact with each
other yes their only reason the only
reason that cosmologists believe they
exist is that they want to explain uh
why odd um why unusual configurations of
matter exist in our Universe they want
to say that in most universes they don't
so that that is
um that's the cosmological kind of
Multiverse universes that don't interact
with each other and you're that's not
part of your thinking that's not you're
agnostic on that perhaps yes I'm I I I I
don't know whether that's true or not
what I do know is that there's a lot
less evidence for the existence of those
than for the quantum Multiverse which
paradoxically have less support among
physicists than the cosmological kind
now in your Multiverse the the different
universes if we call them that actually
do interact which is how you generated
in the first place yes they are in
constant intimate interaction and
although the
um experiments that can only be
explained in terms of Multiverse are
very hard to arrange and they require
very subtle laboratory techniques in
fact we know from the theory that
practically all of our everyday
experience is conditioned by
multi-universe interactions for example
Mata couldn't be solid if each atom only
took one path what keeps it solid is the
um interactions between different
instances of the same atom in different
universes that is what makes for
rigidity it's also for what makes
permanent magnets it's also the reason
that we can have amplification of
signals it's the reason that we can see
stars now clearly that is not a common
accepted view that is well
I think all physicists who look at these
phenomena would agree that quantum
theory is needed to explain those
phenomenals yes but they would not
express quantum theory in terms of
parallel universes for example the the
solidity of matter could be explained by
the Exclusion Principle because things
just can't occupy the same spot and so
yeah so it seems it seems uh rigid when
in fact it's mostly yes so that's a good
example so if we take the Exclusion
Principle and express it in its true
Quantum uh theoretic terms it says that
a sum of certain terms of a vast number
exponentially vast number of terms has
to equal some other exponentially vast
number of terms and that is saying that
each one of these things if it
represents reality represents a
different history of the atoms and they
are affecting each other when you're
saying a different history some people
talk in quantum mechanics as though
these are possible histories but they
don't have a basis in reality you are
claiming that they have a basis in
reality yes I mean this is a dumb
question but how many are there and that
there are
um vast numbers no it's not good enough
vast I want I want a number so for
example if we if we're talking about the
number of different histories that's
happening in let's say a cubic meter of
air
then we're talking in terms of 10 to the
power of 10 to the 23 different
histories are all happening at the same
time so that's 10 to the power of of uh
uh
um of number one with 23 and that
billion billion billion something like
that yes uh and so that's the number of
different histories of this one meter of
air and of course we have a gigantic
universe so one would take it to
unbelievable pattern now those histories
when did they occur that that's from the
beginning of time or right now I mean is
he sequential or in parallel
um one has to understand it in in this
way well first of all yes they have
existed since the Big Bang they they
there was an older version of the
quantum Multiverse in which they only
appeared uh as branches but that has now
been abandoned and in fact we now think
of it in terms of happening for all time
but
um remember that there's a lot more in
the Multiverse than just universes and
in fact universes are an emergent
property of the Multiverse so uh some
types of phenomena like uh human thought
and the outcomes of scientific
experiments are expressible in terms of
um universes but a lot of other
phenomena such as quantum computers or
the interior of molecules are not and
for those it's the Multiverse rather
than individual universes